Welcome to the course!
A number of you know me already. Let me briefly introduce how I will be teaching our course.
It is my conviction that a college liberal arts education is distinguished from earlier education by being centered on primary texts (or, in the case of science, by at least doing key experiments). I believe, then, in reading (and in reading well… no mean accomplishment!) classic texts in philosophy, and in coming to understand both the texts and the key arguments they contain.
It is likewise my conviction that an upper division seminar in philosophy (as opposed to a 100 or 200 level course) is distinguished by having the students in it (1) be primarily responsible for the discussion of the texts in the course and (2) be able to demonstrate an in-depth understanding of some text, philosopher, or argument through a final, in-depth, paper (of at least 15-20 pages).
If you’ve read the syllabus, you will know that I have here merely repeated what it also says.
We are not “in a hurry” in this course (as one always is, for example, in the introductory courses in Ancient and in Modern Philosophy). We have a chance to examine Roman philosophy in-depth. Leaving aside Lucretius (the key and only major Roman Epicurean) and Sextus Empiricus (the key and only major Roman Skeptic), we are examining all of the major Romans philosophers, all of whom either were, or were sympathetic to, Stoics: Cicero, Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius. We will end with a very good sense of Roman Stoicism and of Epictetus in particular (for we will be taking four weeks to go through his major work, his Discourses).
(I take it as understood, from Ancient Philosophy, that there were three major post-Aristotelian movements in Hellenic philosophy: Epicureanism, Stoicism, and Skepticism. Cicero is something of a Skeptic, and he initially looks at both Epicureanism and Stoicism, and so is a good introduction to this period. There was one other major strand of Hellenic philosophy, especially by AD, and that was some form of Platonism and/or Aristotelianism, usually combined with Stoicism in ethics, but not initially developed in its theoretical part. Plato’s thought went through a skeptical phase to emerge more positively at about the time that Aristotle’s works were edited, in the first century BC. They were then combined, for many—and, later, especially the Neo-Platonists—believed that Aristotle was closer to Plato than to the Hellenic philosophers—as he was—and that his analysis of the natural world could be combined with metaphysical issues dear to Platonic thinkers—which at least has some plausibility, and indeed seems arguable on some points, albeit not all. Cicero also puts forward some variant of this strand of philosophy, and so introduces us to all positions in philosophy then current. After this introduction, we turn to an in-depth examination of the Stoics.)
When it comes to the last third of the course, Neo-Platonism, matters are somewhat different. If the center of Stoicism is ethics (as it is), that of Neo-Platonism is metaphysics. Not only is this subject intrinsically more difficult than ethics, but Neo-Platonic metaphysics is as hard as any. It is complicated by the fact that these men consider themselves simply as Platonists, or interpreters of Plato, whose thought (and in his most obscure texts, such as the Parmenides), they have read at length (as we have not). Here, a bit more direction from me will therefore be necessary. Nor, given our time and the extent of their work (there are some 15,000 pages of Neo-Platonic commentary extant, almost all of it just recently having been made available in English), can we do anything 